For some days after that evening Mr. Heathcliff shunned meeting us at 
meals  yet he would not consent formally to exclude Hareton and Cathy.  He 
had an aversion to yielding so completely to his feelings, choosing 
rather to absent himself  and eating once in twenty four hours seemed 
sufficient sustenance for him. 
 
One night, after the family were in bed, I heard him go downstairs, and 
out at the front door.  I did not hear him re enter, and in the morning I 
found he was still away.  We were in April then  the weather was sweet 
and warm, the grass as green as showers and sun could make it, and the 
two dwarf apple trees near the southern wall in full bloom.  After 
breakfast, Catherine insisted on my bringing a chair and sitting with my 
work under the fir trees at the end of the house  and she beguiled 
Hareton, who had perfectly recovered from his accident, to dig and 
arrange her little garden, which was shifted to that corner by the 
influence of Joseph s complaints.  I was comfortably revelling in the 
spring fragrance around, and the beautiful soft blue overhead, when my 
young lady, who had run down near the gate to procure some primrose roots 
for a border, returned only half laden, and informed us that Mr. 
Heathcliff was coming in.   And he spoke to me,  she added, with a 
perplexed countenance. 
 
 What did he say   asked Hareton. 
 
 He told me to begone as fast as I could,  she answered.   But he looked 
so different from his usual look that I stopped a moment to stare at 
him.  
 
 How   he inquired. 
 
 Why, almost bright and cheerful.  No,  almost  nothing   very much  
excited, and wild, and glad   she replied. 
 
 Night walking amuses him, then,  I remarked, affecting a careless 
manner  in reality as surprised as she was, and anxious to ascertain the 
truth of her statement  for to see the master looking glad would not be 
an every day spectacle.  I framed an excuse to go in.  Heathcliff stood 
at the open door  he was pale, and he trembled  yet, certainly, he had a 
strange joyful glitter in his eyes, that altered the aspect of his whole 
face. 
 
 Will you have some breakfast   I said.   You must be hungry, rambling 
about all night    I wanted to discover where he had been, but I did not 
like to ask directly. 
 
 No, I m not hungry,  he answered, averting his head, and speaking rather 
contemptuously, as if he guessed I was trying to divine the occasion of 
his good humour. 
 
I felt perplexed  I didn t know whether it were not a proper opportunity 
to offer a bit of admonition. 
 
 I don t think it right to wander out of doors,  I observed,  instead of 
being in bed  it is not wise, at any rate this moist season.  I daresay 
you ll catch a bad cold or a fever  you have something the matter with 
you now   
 
 Nothing but what I can bear,  he replied   and with the greatest 
pleasure, provided you ll leave me alone  get in, and don t annoy me.  
 
I obeyed  and, in passing, I noticed he breathed as fast as a cat. 
 
 Yes   I reflected to myself,  we shall have a fit of illness.  I cannot 
conceive what he has been doing.  
 
That noon he sat down to dinner with us, and received a heaped up plate 
from my hands, as if he intended to make amends for previous fasting. 
 
 I ve neither cold nor fever, Nelly,  he remarked, in allusion to my 
morning s speech   and I m ready to do justice to the food you give me.  
 
He took his knife and fork, and was going to commence eating, when the 
inclination appeared to become suddenly extinct.  He laid them on the 
table, looked eagerly towards the window, then rose and went out.  We saw 
him walking to and fro in the garden while we concluded our meal, and 
Earnshaw said he d go and ask why he would not dine  he thought we had 
grieved him some way. 
 
 Well, is he coming   cried Catherine, when her cousin returned. 
 
 Nay,  he answered   but he s not angry  he seemed rarely pleased indeed  
only I made him impatient by speaking to him twice  and then he bid me be 
off to you  he wondered how I could want the company of anybody else.  
 
I set his plate to keep warm on the fender  and after an hour or two he 
re entered, when the room was clear, in no degree calmer  the same 
unnatural  it was unnatural  appearance of joy under his black brows  the 
same bloodless hue, and his teeth visible, now and then, in a kind of 
smile  his frame shivering, not as one shivers with chill or weakness, 
but as a tight stretched cord vibrates  a strong thrilling, rather than 
trembling. 
 
I will ask what is the matter, I thought  or who should   And I 
exclaimed   Have you heard any good news, Mr. Heathcliff   You look 
uncommonly animated.  
 
 Where should good news come from to me   he said.   I m animated with 
hunger  and, seemingly, I must not eat.  
 
 Your dinner is here,  I returned   why won t you get it   
 
 I don t want it now,  he muttered, hastily   I ll wait till supper.  And, 
Nelly, once for all, let me beg you to warn Hareton and the other away 
from me.  I wish to be troubled by nobody  I wish to have this place to 
myself.  
 
 Is there some new reason for this banishment   I inquired.   Tell me why 
you are so queer, Mr. Heathcliff   Where were you last night   I m not 
putting the question through idle curiosity, but    
 
 You are putting the question through very idle curiosity,  he 
interrupted, with a laugh.   Yet I ll answer it.  Last night I was on the 
threshold of hell.  To day, I am within sight of my heaven.  I have my 
eyes on it  hardly three feet to sever me   And now you d better go  
You ll neither see nor hear anything to frighten you, if you refrain from 
prying.  
 
Having swept the hearth and wiped the table, I departed  more perplexed 
than ever. 
 
He did not quit the house again that afternoon, and no one intruded on 
his solitude  till, at eight o clock, I deemed it proper, though 
unsummoned, to carry a candle and his supper to him.  He was leaning 
against the ledge of an open lattice, but not looking out  his face was 
turned to the interior gloom.  The fire had smouldered to ashes  the room 
was filled with the damp, mild air of the cloudy evening  and so still, 
that not only the murmur of the beck down Gimmerton was distinguishable, 
but its ripples and its gurgling over the pebbles, or through the large 
stones which it could not cover.  I uttered an ejaculation of discontent 
at seeing the dismal grate, and commenced shutting the casements, one 
after another, till I came to his. 
 
 Must I close this   I asked, in order to rouse him  for he would not 
stir. 
 
The light flashed on his features as I spoke.  Oh, Mr. Lockwood, I cannot 
express what a terrible start I got by the momentary view   Those deep 
black eyes   That smile, and ghastly paleness   It appeared to me, not 
Mr. Heathcliff, but a goblin  and, in my terror, I let the candle bend 
towards the wall, and it left me in darkness. 
 
 Yes, close it,  he replied, in his familiar voice.   There, that is pure 
awkwardness   Why did you hold the candle horizontally   Be quick, and 
bring another.  
 
I hurried out in a foolish state of dread, and said to Joseph   The 
master wishes you to take him a light and rekindle the fire.   For I 
dared not go in myself again just then. 
 
Joseph rattled some fire into the shovel, and went  but he brought it 
back immediately, with the supper tray in his other hand, explaining that 
Mr. Heathcliff was going to bed, and he wanted nothing to eat till 
morning.  We heard him mount the stairs directly  he did not proceed to 
his ordinary chamber, but turned into that with the panelled bed  its 
window, as I mentioned before, is wide enough for anybody to get through  
and it struck me that he plotted another midnight excursion, of which he 
had rather we had no suspicion. 
 
 Is he a ghoul or a vampire   I mused.  I had read of such hideous 
incarnate demons.  And then I set myself to reflect how I had tended him 
in infancy, and watched him grow to youth, and followed him almost 
through his whole course  and what absurd nonsense it was to yield to 
that sense of horror.   But where did he come from, the little dark 
thing, harboured by a good man to his bane   muttered Superstition, as I 
dozed into unconsciousness.  And I began, half dreaming, to weary myself 
with imagining some fit parentage for him  and, repeating my waking 
meditations, I tracked his existence over again, with grim variations  at 
last, picturing his death and funeral  of which, all I can remember is, 
being exceedingly vexed at having the task of dictating an inscription 
for his monument, and consulting the sexton about it  and, as he had no 
surname, and we could not tell his age, we were obliged to content 
ourselves with the single word,  Heathcliff.   That came true  we were. 
If you enter the kirkyard, you ll read, on his headstone, only that, and 
the date of his death. 
 
Dawn restored me to common sense.  I rose, and went into the garden, as 
soon as I could see, to ascertain if there were any footmarks under his 
window.  There were none.   He has stayed at home,  I thought,  and he ll 
be all right to day.   I prepared breakfast for the household, as was my 
usual custom, but told Hareton and Catherine to get theirs ere the master 
came down, for he lay late.  They preferred taking it out of doors, under 
the trees, and I set a little table to accommodate them. 
 
On my re entrance, I found Mr. Heathcliff below.  He and Joseph were 
conversing about some farming business  he gave clear, minute directions 
concerning the matter discussed, but he spoke rapidly, and turned his 
head continually aside, and had the same excited expression, even more 
exaggerated.  When Joseph quitted the room he took his seat in the place 
he generally chose, and I put a basin of coffee before him.  He drew it 
nearer, and then rested his arms on the table, and looked at the opposite 
wall, as I supposed, surveying one particular portion, up and down, with 
glittering, restless eyes, and with such eager interest that he stopped 
breathing during half a minute together. 
 
 Come now,  I exclaimed, pushing some bread against his hand,  eat and 
drink that, while it is hot  it has been waiting near an hour.  
 
He didn t notice me, and yet he smiled.  I d rather have seen him gnash 
his teeth than smile so. 
 
 Mr. Heathcliff  master   I cried,  don t, for God s sake, stare as if 
you saw an unearthly vision.  
 
 Don t, for God s sake, shout so loud,  he replied.   Turn round, and 
tell me, are we by ourselves   
 
 Of course,  was my answer   of course we are.  
 
Still, I involuntarily obeyed him, as if I was not quite sure.  With a 
sweep of his hand he cleared a vacant space in front among the breakfast 
things, and leant forward to gaze more at his ease. 
 
Now, I perceived he was not looking at the wall  for when I regarded him 
alone, it seemed exactly that he gazed at something within two yards  
distance.  And whatever it was, it communicated, apparently, both 
pleasure and pain in exquisite extremes  at least the anguished, yet 
raptured, expression of his countenance suggested that idea.  The fancied 
object was not fixed, either  his eyes pursued it with unwearied 
diligence, and, even in speaking to me, were never weaned away.  I vainly 
reminded him of his protracted abstinence from food  if he stirred to 
touch anything in compliance with my entreaties, if he stretched his hand 
out to get a piece of bread, his fingers clenched before they reached it, 
and remained on the table, forgetful of their aim. 
 
I sat, a model of patience, trying to attract his absorbed attention from 
its engrossing speculation  till he grew irritable, and got up, asking 
why I would not allow him to have his own time in taking his meals  and 
saying that on the next occasion I needn t wait  I might set the things 
down and go.  Having uttered these words he left the house, slowly 
sauntered down the garden path, and disappeared through the gate. 
 
The hours crept anxiously by  another evening came.  I did not retire to 
rest till late, and when I did, I could not sleep.  He returned after 
midnight, and, instead of going to bed, shut himself into the room 
beneath.  I listened, and tossed about, and, finally, dressed and 
descended.  It was too irksome to lie there, harassing my brain with a 
hundred idle misgivings. 
 
I distinguished Mr. Heathcliff s step, restlessly measuring the floor, 
and he frequently broke the silence by a deep inspiration, resembling a 
groan.  He muttered detached words also  the only one I could catch was 
the name of Catherine, coupled with some wild term of endearment or 
suffering  and spoken as one would speak to a person present  low and 
earnest, and wrung from the depth of his soul.  I had not courage to walk 
straight into the apartment  but I desired to divert him from his 
reverie, and therefore fell foul of the kitchen fire, stirred it, and 
began to scrape the cinders.  It drew him forth sooner than I expected. 
He opened the door immediately, and said   Nelly, come here  is it 
morning   Come in with your light.  
 
 It is striking four,  I answered.   You want a candle to take up stairs  
you might have lit one at this fire.  
 
 No, I don t wish to go up stairs,  he said.   Come in, and kindle  me  a 
fire, and do anything there is to do about the room.  
 
 I must blow the coals red first, before I can carry any,  I replied, 
getting a chair and the bellows. 
 
He roamed to and fro, meantime, in a state approaching distraction  his 
heavy sighs succeeding each other so thick as to leave no space for 
common breathing between. 
 
 When day breaks I ll send for Green,  he said   I wish to make some 
legal inquiries of him while I can bestow a thought on those matters, and 
while I can act calmly.  I have not written my will yet  and how to leave 
my property I cannot determine.  I wish I could annihilate it from the 
face of the earth.  
 
 I would not talk so, Mr. Heathcliff,  I interposed.  Let your will be a 
while  you ll be spared to repent of your many injustices yet  I never 
expected that your nerves would be disordered  they are, at present, 
marvellously so, however  and almost entirely through your own fault. 
The way you ve passed these three last days might knock up a Titan. Do 
take some food, and some repose. You need only look at yourself in a 
glass to see how you require both. Your cheeks are hollow, and your eyes 
blood shot, like a person starving with hunger and going blind with loss 
of sleep.  
 
 It is not my fault that I cannot eat or rest,  he replied.   I assure 
you it is through no settled designs.  I ll do both, as soon as I 
possibly can.  But you might as well bid a man struggling in the water 
rest within arms  length of the shore   I must reach it first, and then 
I ll rest.  Well, never mind Mr. Green  as to repenting of my injustices, 
I ve done no injustice, and I repent of nothing.  I m too happy  and yet 
I m not happy enough.  My soul s bliss kills my body, but does not 
satisfy itself.  
 
 Happy, master   I cried.   Strange happiness   If you would hear me 
without being angry, I might offer some advice that would make you 
happier.  
 
 What is that   he asked.   Give it.  
 
 You are aware, Mr. Heathcliff,  I said,  that from the time you were 
thirteen years old you have lived a selfish, unchristian life  and 
probably hardly had a Bible in your hands during all that period.  You 
must have forgotten the contents of the book, and you may not have space 
to search it now.  Could it be hurtful to send for some one  some 
minister of any denomination, it does not matter which  to explain it, 
and show you how very far you have erred from its precepts  and how unfit 
you will be for its heaven, unless a change takes place before you die   
 
 I m rather obliged than angry, Nelly,  he said,  for you remind me of 
the manner in which I desire to be buried.  It is to be carried to the 
churchyard in the evening.  You and Hareton may, if you please, accompany 
me  and mind, particularly, to notice that the sexton obeys my directions 
concerning the two coffins   No minister need come  nor need anything be 
said over me.  I tell you I have nearly attained  my  heaven  and that of 
others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me.  
 
 And supposing you persevered in your obstinate fast, and died by that 
means, and they refused to bury you in the precincts of the kirk   I 
said, shocked at his godless indifference.   How would you like it   
 
 They won t do that,  he replied   if they did, you must have me removed 
secretly  and if you neglect it you shall prove, practically, that the 
dead are not annihilated   
 
As soon as he heard the other members of the family stirring he retired 
to his den, and I breathed freer.  But in the afternoon, while Joseph and 
Hareton were at their work, he came into the kitchen again, and, with a 
wild look, bid me come and sit in the house  he wanted somebody with him. 
I declined  telling him plainly that his strange talk and manner 
frightened me, and I had neither the nerve nor the will to be his 
companion alone. 
 
 I believe you think me a fiend,  he said, with his dismal laugh  
 something too horrible to live under a decent roof.   Then turning to 
Catherine, who was there, and who drew behind me at his approach, he 
added, half sneeringly,   Will  you  come, chuck   I ll not hurt you.  No  
to you I ve made myself worse than the devil.  Well, there is  one  who 
won t shrink from my company   By God  she s relentless.  Oh, damn it  
It s unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear  even mine.  
 
He solicited the society of no one more.  At dusk he went into his 
chamber.  Through the whole night, and far into the morning, we heard him 
groaning and murmuring to himself.  Hareton was anxious to enter  but I 
bid him fetch Mr. Kenneth, and he should go in and see him.  When he 
came, and I requested admittance and tried to open the door, I found it 
locked  and Heathcliff bid us be damned.  He was better, and would be 
left alone  so the doctor went away. 
 
The following evening was very wet  indeed, it poured down till day dawn  
and, as I took my morning walk round the house, I observed the master s 
window swinging open, and the rain driving straight in.  He cannot be in 
bed, I thought  those showers would drench him through.  He must either 
be up or out.  But I ll make no more ado, I ll go boldly and look.  
 
Having succeeded in obtaining entrance with another key, I ran to unclose 
the panels, for the chamber was vacant  quickly pushing them aside, I 
peeped in.  Mr. Heathcliff was there  laid on his back.  His eyes met 
mine so keen and fierce, I started  and then he seemed to smile.  I could 
not think him dead  but his face and throat were washed with rain  the 
bed clothes dripped, and he was perfectly still.  The lattice, flapping 
to and fro, had grazed one hand that rested on the sill  no blood 
trickled from the broken skin, and when I put my fingers to it, I could 
doubt no more  he was dead and stark  
 
I hasped the window  I combed his black long hair from his forehead  I 
tried to close his eyes  to extinguish, if possible, that frightful, 
life like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it. They would 
not shut  they seemed to sneer at my attempts  and his parted lips and 
sharp white teeth sneered too  Taken with another fit of cowardice, I 
cried out for Joseph. Joseph shuffled up and made a noise, but 
resolutely refused to meddle with him. 
 
 Th  divil s harried off his soul,  he cried,  and he may hev  his 
carcass into t  bargin, for aught I care   Ech  what a wicked  un he 
looks, girning at death   and the old sinner grinned in mockery.  I 
thought he intended to cut a caper round the bed  but suddenly composing 
himself, he fell on his knees, and raised his hands, and returned thanks 
that the lawful master and the ancient stock were restored to their 
rights. 
 
I felt stunned by the awful event  and my memory unavoidably recurred to 
former times with a sort of oppressive sadness.  But poor Hareton, the 
most wronged, was the only one who really suffered much.  He sat by the 
corpse all night, weeping in bitter earnest.  He pressed its hand, and 
kissed the sarcastic, savage face that every one else shrank from 
contemplating  and bemoaned him with that strong grief which springs 
naturally from a generous heart, though it be tough as tempered steel. 
 
Mr. Kenneth was perplexed to pronounce of what disorder the master died. 
I concealed the fact of his having swallowed nothing for four days, 
fearing it might lead to trouble, and then, I am persuaded, he did not 
abstain on purpose  it was the consequence of his strange illness, not 
the cause. 
 
We buried him, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood, as he wished. 
Earnshaw and I, the sexton, and six men to carry the coffin, comprehended 
the whole attendance.  The six men departed when they had let it down 
into the grave  we stayed to see it covered.  Hareton, with a streaming 
face, dug green sods, and laid them over the brown mould himself  at 
present it is as smooth and verdant as its companion mounds  and I hope 
its tenant sleeps as soundly.  But the country folks, if you ask them, 
would swear on the Bible that he  walks   there are those who speak to 
having met him near the church, and on the moor, and even within this 
house.  Idle tales, you ll say, and so say I.  Yet that old man by the 
kitchen fire affirms he has seen two on  em looking out of his chamber 
window on every rainy night since his death   and an odd thing happened 
to me about a month ago.  I was going to the Grange one evening  a dark 
evening, threatening thunder  and, just at the turn of the Heights, I 
encountered a little boy with a sheep and two lambs before him  he was 
crying terribly  and I supposed the lambs were skittish, and would not be 
guided. 
 
 What is the matter, my little man   I asked. 
 
 There s Heathcliff and a woman yonder, under t  nab,  he blubbered,  un  
I darnut pass  em.  
 
I saw nothing  but neither the sheep nor he would go on so I bid him take 
the road lower down.  He probably raised the phantoms from thinking, as 
he traversed the moors alone, on the nonsense he had heard his parents 
and companions repeat.  Yet, still, I don t like being out in the dark 
now  and I don t like being left by myself in this grim house  I cannot 
help it  I shall be glad when they leave it, and shift to the Grange. 
 
 They are going to the Grange, then   I said. 
 
 Yes,  answered Mrs. Dean,  as soon as they are married, and that will be 
on New Year s Day.  
 
 And who will live here then   
 
 Why, Joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, a lad to keep him 
company.  They will live in the kitchen, and the rest will be shut up.  
 
 For the use of such ghosts as choose to inhabit it   I observed. 
 
 No, Mr. Lockwood,  said Nelly, shaking her head.   I believe the dead 
are at peace  but it is not right to speak of them with levity.  
 
At that moment the garden gate swung to  the ramblers were returning. 
 
  They  are afraid of nothing,  I grumbled, watching their approach 
through the window.   Together, they would brave Satan and all his 
legions.  
 
As they stepped on to the door stones, and halted to take a last look at 
the moon  or, more correctly, at each other by her light  I felt 
irresistibly impelled to escape them again  and, pressing a remembrance 
into the hand of Mrs. Dean, and disregarding her expostulations at my 
rudeness, I vanished through the kitchen as they opened the house door  
and so should have confirmed Joseph in his opinion of his 
fellow servant s gay indiscretions, had he not fortunately recognised me 
for a respectable character by the sweet ring of a sovereign at his feet. 
 
My walk home was lengthened by a diversion in the direction of the kirk. 
When beneath its walls, I perceived decay had made progress, even in 
seven months  many a window showed black gaps deprived of glass  and 
slates jutted off here and there, beyond the right line of the roof, to 
be gradually worked off in coming autumn storms. 
 
I sought, and soon discovered, the three headstones on the slope next the 
moor  the middle one grey, and half buried in the heath  Edgar Linton s 
only harmonized by the turf and moss creeping up its foot  Heathcliff s 
still bare. 
 
I lingered round them, under that benign sky  watched the moths 
fluttering among the heath and harebells, listened to the soft wind 
breathing through the grass, and wondered how any one could ever imagine 
unquiet slumbers for the sleepers in that quiet earth. 
 
 
 
   END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WUTHERING HEIGHTS    
 
 
        This file should be named 768.txt or 768.zip         
 
 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in  
http   www.gutenberg.org dirs 7 6 768 
 
 
 
Updated editions will replace the previous one  the old editions 
will be renamed. 
 
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no 
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation 
 and you   can copy and distribute it in the United States without 
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, 
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to 
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg tm electronic works to 
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG tm concept and trademark.  Project 
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you 
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you 
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the 
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose 
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and 
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away  you may do 
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is 
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial 
redistribution. 
 
 
 
    START  FULL LICENSE     
 
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE 
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK 
 
To protect the Project Gutenberg tm mission of promoting the free 
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work 
 or any other work associated in any way with the phrase  Project 
Gutenberg  , you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project 
Gutenberg tm License  available with this file or online at 
http   www.gutenberg.org license . 
 
 
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg tm 
electronic works 
 
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg tm 
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to 
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property 
 trademark copyright  agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all 
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy 
all copies of Project Gutenberg tm electronic works in your possession. 
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project 
Gutenberg tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the 
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or 
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8. 
 
1.B.   Project Gutenberg  is a registered trademark.  It may only be 
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who 
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few 
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg tm electronic works 
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See 
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project 
Gutenberg tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement 
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg tm electronic 
works.  See paragraph 1.E below. 
 
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation   the Foundation  
or PGLAF , owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project 
Gutenberg tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the 
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an 
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are 
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from 
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative 
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg 
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project 
Gutenberg tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by 
freely sharing Project Gutenberg tm works in compliance with the terms of 
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg tm name associated with 
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by 
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project 
Gutenberg tm License when you share it without charge with others. 
 
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern 
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in 
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check 
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement 
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or 
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project 
Gutenberg tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning 
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United 
States. 
 
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg  
 
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate 
access to, the full Project Gutenberg tm License must appear prominently 
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg tm work  any work on which the 
phrase  Project Gutenberg  appears, or with which the phrase  Project 
Gutenberg  is associated  is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, 
copied or distributed  
 
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with 
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or 
re use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included 
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org 
 
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg tm electronic work is derived 
from the public domain  does not contain a notice indicating that it is 
posted with permission of the copyright holder , the work can be copied 
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees 
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work 
with the phrase  Project Gutenberg  associated with or appearing on the 
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the 
Project Gutenberg tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 
1.E.9. 
 
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg tm electronic work is posted 
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution 
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional 
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked 
to the Project Gutenberg tm License for all works posted with the 
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work. 
 
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg tm 
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this 
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg tm. 
 
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this 
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without 
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with 
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project 
Gutenberg tm License. 
 
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, 
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any 
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or 
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg tm work in a format other than 
 Plain Vanilla ASCII  or other format used in the official version 
posted on the official Project Gutenberg tm web site  www.gutenberg.org , 
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a 
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon 
request, of the work in its original  Plain Vanilla ASCII  or other 
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg tm 
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1. 
 
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, 
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg tm works 
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9. 
 
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing 
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg tm electronic works provided 
that 
 
  You pay a royalty fee of 20  of the gross profits you derive from 
     the use of Project Gutenberg tm works calculated using the method 
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is 
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg tm trademark, but he 
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the 
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments 
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you 
     prepare  or are legally required to prepare  your periodic tax 
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and 
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the 
     address specified in Section 4,  Information about donations to 
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  
 
  You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies 
     you in writing  or by e mail  within 30 days of receipt that s he 
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg tm 
     License.  You must require such a user to return or 
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium 
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of 
     Project Gutenberg tm works. 
 
  You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any 
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the 
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days 
     of receipt of the work. 
 
  You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free 
     distribution of Project Gutenberg tm works. 
 
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg tm 
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set 
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from 
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael 
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg tm trademark.  Contact the 
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below. 
 
1.F. 
 
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable 
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread 
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg tm 
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg tm electronic 
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain 
 Defects,  such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or 
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual 
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a 
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by 
your equipment. 
 
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES   Except for the  Right 
of Replacement or Refund  described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project 
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project 
Gutenberg tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project 
Gutenberg tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all 
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal 
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT 
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE 
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE 
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE 
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR 
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH 
DAMAGE. 
 
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND   If you discover a 
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can 
receive a refund of the money  if any  you paid for it by sending a 
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you 
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with 
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with 
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a 
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity 
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to 
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy 
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further 
opportunities to fix the problem. 
 
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth 
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you  AS IS , WITH NO OTHER 
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE. 
 
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied 
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. 
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the 
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be 
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by 
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any 
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions. 
 
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY   You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the 
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone 
providing copies of Project Gutenberg tm electronic works in accordance 
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, 
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg tm electronic works, 
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, 
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do 
or cause to occur   a  distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg tm 
work,  b  alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any 
Project Gutenberg tm work, and  c  any Defect you cause. 
 
 
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg tm 
 
Project Gutenberg tm is synonymous with the free distribution of 
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers 
including obsolete, old, middle aged and new computers.  It exists 
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from 
people in all walks of life. 
 
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the 
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg tm s 
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg tm collection will 
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project 
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure 
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg tm and future generations. 
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation 
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 
and the Foundation web page at http   www.gutenberg.org fundraising pglaf. 
 
 
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive 
Foundation 
 
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit 
501 c  3  educational corporation organized under the laws of the 
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal 
Revenue Service.  The Foundation s EIN or federal tax identification 
number is 64 6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg 
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent 
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state s laws. 
 
The Foundation s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S. 
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered 
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116,  801  596 1887, email 
business pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact 
information can be found at the Foundation s web site and official 
page at http   www.gutenberg.org about contact 
 
For additional contact information  
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby 
     Chief Executive and Director 
     gbnewby pglaf.org 
 
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg 
Literary Archive Foundation 
 
Project Gutenberg tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide 
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of 
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be 
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest 
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations 
  1 to  5,000  are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt 
status with the IRS. 
 
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating 
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United 
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a 
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up 
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations 
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To 
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any 
particular state visit http   www.gutenberg.org fundraising donate 
 
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we 
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition 
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who 
approach us with offers to donate. 
 
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make 
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from 
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff. 
 
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation 
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other 
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. 
To donate, please visit  
http   www.gutenberg.org fundraising donate 
 
 
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg tm electronic 
works. 
 
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg tm 
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared 
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project 
Gutenberg tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support. 
 
Project Gutenberg tm eBooks are often created from several printed 
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. 
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily 
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition. 
 
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility  
 
     http   www.gutenberg.org 
 
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg tm, 
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to 
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks. 
